Treasury guides (#5690)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-guides-treasury.md

:::

> ## Creating A Treasury Proposal - Spend Local

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating a Treasury Proposal - Spend Local
```

:::info "Spend" vs. "Spend Local"

> You may notice that the treasury pallet contains two extrinsics - `treasury.spend` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may notice that the Treasury pallet contains two extrinsics - `treasury.spend` and
```

`treasury.spend_local`. `treasury.spend_local` (formally called `treasury.spend`) refers to a spend

> of DOT which is locally available, i.e., DOT from the relay chain's treasury. `spend` actually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of DOT that is locally available, i.e., DOT from the Relay Chain's treasury. `spend` actually
```

> allows for a spend to be specified in an asset other than DOT, or even DOT on a parachain like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows the caller to specify an asset other than DOT, or even assets in other locations, e.g.
```

> [AssetHub](../general/glossary.md#asset-hub).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Asset Hub](../general/glossary.md#asset-hub).
```

Unlike `treasuy.spendLocal`, `treasury.spend` is **not** bound by a spend period, and must be

> claimed manually via the `treasury.payout` extrinsic. `treasuy.spendLocal` behavior remains

Reviewer: Please choose a style, `spend_local` or `spendLocal`, and stick to it. Both are fine, inconsistency is not.

:::

## Creating a Treasury Proposal - Spend Local

:::info "Spend" vs. "Spend Local"

You may notice that the Treasury pallet contains two extrinsics - `treasury.spend` and
`treasury.spendLocal`. `treasury.spendLocal` (formally called `treasury.spend`) refers to a spend of

> DOT that is locally available, i.e., DOT from the Relay Chain's treasury. `spend` actually allows

Reviewer: This is a little nitpicky, but I do want to separate the concept of "Treasury" being the logic that dictates how a collective's or the network's assets are spent and the location of those assets.

Think of a Treasury like a human with multiple bank accounts. Just because you open a bank account in a new country does not imply that you yourself have been cloned.

The Treasury will exist wherever decisions get made (as in, where governance exists). It could move to a system parachain along with the rest of governance, but still hold assets on the Relay Chain.

That is, what you call the "Relay Chain's treasury" is just the "Polkadot treasury", and what you mean specifically here is the assets that is has on the same chain (like assets in the account of the bank where you live).

This is all a long way of saying, I think this should read, "i.e., DOT in the Relay Chain's treasury account."

the caller to specify an asset other than DOT, or even assets in other locations, e.g.
[Asset Hub](../general/glossary.md#asset-hub).

> Unlike `treasuy.spendLocal`, `treasury.spend` is **not** bound by a spend period, and must be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike `treasury.spendLocal`, `treasury.spend` is **not** bound by a spend period, and must be
```

The preimage and decision deposits
[can be claimed once the referendum ends](./learn-guides-polkadot-opengov.md#claiming-the-preimage-and-decision-deposits).

## Creating a USDT Treasury Proposal - Spend (with AssetHub)

> The following mostly goes over how to utilize the `spend` extrinsic, which unlike `spend_local`, is
> able to specify assets besides the native asset on system parachains, such as
> [AssetHub](../general/glossary.md#asset-hub).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following mostly goes over how to utilize the `spend` extrinsic, which, unlike `spend_local`, is
able to specify assets besides the native asset in other locations, such as
[Asset Hub](../general/glossary.md#asset-hub).
```

> ### Creating a preimage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating a Preimage
```

The example below shows how to create a [preimage](../general/glossary#preimage) for a transaction
that requests 100 USDT from AssetHub.

- Navigate to [Polkadot-JS UI > Governance > Referenda](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/preimages)
  and then click on Add Preimage.
- Select the account to submit the preimage.

> - Choose the`treasury` pallet in the "propose" dropdown and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Choose the `treasury` pallet in the "propose" dropdown and the
```

  `spend(assetKind, amount, beneficiary, validFrom)` call

> Now, let's go by each field one-by-one and fill it out accordingly:

Reviewer: English prepositions 🙈 
```suggestion
Now, let's go through each field one-by-one and fill them in accordingly:
```

> ### Specifying asset kind

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Specifying Asset Kind
```

`assetKind` refers to the asset to be used, specified via XCM. In short, we need to be able to find:

> - Which system parachain the asset lives on
> - Which pallet and asset ID does it correspond to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The relative location of the asset, and
- How it is identified within this location.
```

> For this example, we are using USDT, which from the perspective of asking for USDT on the relay
> chain on AssetHub would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this example, we are using USDT, which from the perspective of the Relay Chain would be:
```

`Parachain 1000 (AssetHub) > AssetId (Concrete) > PalletInstance 50 > General Index 1984`

> First, we specify which parachain - in this case, AssetHub (1000). `PalletInstance 50` refers to the
> asset pallet instance on AssetHub. The general index is `1984`, which is the ID of USDT on the asset
> pallet on AssetHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we specify the location - in this case, Asset Hub (parachain 1,000). `PalletInstance 50` refers to the
Assets pallet instance on Asset Hub. The general index is `1984`, which is the ID of USDT in this instance
of the Assets pallet.
```

Here is how the final `assetKind` field should look:

> ### Specifying the amount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Specifying the Amount
```

The amount should be simply the amount of USDT, where each `1` USDT is `1000000`. Because we are

> asking for 100 USDT, we put `100000000` as the input for the amount:

Reviewer: Based on the `:` I assume you intend to put screenshots here?

Author: Yes, will presumably be done after the written content is finalized

> ### Specifying beneficiary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Specifying the Beneficiary
```

> The beneficiary account will be one on AssetHub. For this reason, the XCM junction must be specified
> as follows, with one junction (`X1`) and the beneficiary account(`AccountID32`), which is an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The beneficiary account will be one on Asset Hub. For this reason, the XCM junction must be specified
as follows, with one junction (`X1`) and the beneficiary account(`AccountId32`), which is an
```

address:

### Specifying `validFrom` (optional)

The `validFrom` field is optional, and refers to the block height upon which the payout may be
issued. For more information on this field, refer to the

> [guide below.](#creating-a-staged-proposal-with-validfrom)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[guide below](#creating-a-staged-proposal-with-validfrom).
```

### Summary: Final Call

The final call should look like the following, where we:

> - Specify our asset as **USDT** on **AssetHub**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specify our asset as **USDT** on **Asset Hub**.
```

- Specify the **amount** of **USDT** (100).
- Specify the beneficiary address.
- If applicable, use the `validFrom` field to specify a block number upon which the payout becomes
  valid.

The next steps are to:

- Copy the preimage (and its length)
- Sign and submit the preimage

Once this is finished, one may submit a proposal
[as stated above](#submit-a-treasury-track-referendum). Keep in mind one will also need to

> [provide the decision deposit as well!](#place-a-decision-deposit-for-the-treasury-track-referendum)

Reviewer: Never `!` in professional writing.
```suggestion
[provide the decision deposit as well](#place-a-decision-deposit-for-the-treasury-track-referendum).
```

## Creating a Staged Proposal with `validFrom`

Staged proposals are similar to a tranche or milestone-based funding model; instead of all spends
being paid simultaneously, each portion is redeemable at a certain block height. This is done by
specifying each milestone, set at its respective amount and block height at which it becomes
redeemable.

> For example, take the following "staged" proposal which has three milestones, each at 100 DOT, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, take the following "staged" proposal, which has three milestones, each at 100 DOT, and
```

is redeemable at the following block heights. Usually, block heights correspond to a date in the
future:

- 100 DOT paid out at block height 1000
- 200 DOT paid out at block height 2000
- 500 DOT paid out at block height 4000

Governance can also propose to **void** a staged proposal before it has completed all of its

> pay-outs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
payouts.
```

:::info Calculating dates from block heights

Although not the most accurate form of measurement, block heights can be used to correspond to
certain dates in the future.

:::

> ### Using `batchAll` for multi-spend proposals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using `batchAll` for Multi-Spend Proposals
```

> Using the utility pallet, one can batch multiple `treasury.spend` calls together. Each of these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the Utility pallet, one can batch multiple `treasury.spend` calls together. Each of these
```

calls can have their own `validFrom` block heights, which allows for scenarios such as the above to
be possible.

> ### Using `validFrom` for a milestone-based proposal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using `validFrom` for a Milestone-Based Proposal
```

> Once each spend is defined within the batched call, the validFrom field can be utilized to specify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once each spend is defined within the batched call, the `validFrom` field can be utilized to specify
```

the "date", or block height, at which each spend will be executed.

> ### Manually claiming payouts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Manually Claiming Payouts
```

:::info Spends can expire!

Keep in mind that once the `validFrom` block height has been reached, you will have to claim the

> spend before it expires.

Reviewer: Can you add more info about this? Before you said that this doesn't face spending period limitations, but this implies that there are some temporal limitations?

Reviewer 2: 30 days according to this writeup https://forum.polkadot.network/t/multi-asset-treasury-and-milestone-based-spends/6780

The preimage and decision deposits
[can be claimed once the referendum ends](./learn-guides-polkadot-opengov.md#claiming-the-preimage-and-decision-deposits).

## Creating a USDT Treasury Proposal - Spend (with AssetHub)

The following mostly goes over how to utilize the `spend` extrinsic, which, unlike `spendLocal`, is
able to specify assets besides the native asset in other locations, such as
[Asset Hub](../general/glossary.md#asset-hub).

### Creating a Preimage

The example below shows how to create a [preimage](../general/glossary#preimage) for a transaction
that requests 100 USDT from AssetHub.

- Navigate to [Polkadot-JS UI > Governance > Referenda](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/preimages)
  and then click on Add Preimage.
- Select the account to submit the preimage.
- Choose the `treasury` pallet in the "propose" dropdown and the

>   `spend(assetKind, amount, beneficiary, validFrom)` call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `spend(assetKind, amount, beneficiary, validFrom)` call.
```

Now, let's go through each field one-by-one and fill them in accordingly:

### Specifying Asset Kind

`assetKind` refers to the asset to be used, specified via XCM. In short, we need to be able to find:

- The relative location of the asset, and
- How it is identified within this location.

For this example, we are using USDT, which from the perspective of the Relay Chain would be:

`Parachain 1000 (AssetHub) > AssetId (Concrete) > PalletInstance 50 > General Index 1984`

First, we specify the location - in this case, Asset Hub (parachain 1,000). `PalletInstance 50`
refers to the Assets pallet instance on Asset Hub. The general index is `1984`, which is the ID of
USDT in this instance of the Assets pallet.

Here is how the final `assetKind` field should look:

### Specifying the Amount

The amount should be simply the amount of USDT, where each `1` USDT is `1000000`. Because we are
asking for 100 USDT, we put `100000000` as the input for the amount:

### Specifying the Beneficiary

The beneficiary account will be one on Asset Hub. For this reason, the XCM junction must be

> specified as follows, with one junction (`X1`) and the beneficiary account(`AccountId32`), which is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specified as follows, with one junction (`X1`) and the beneficiary account (`AccountId32`), which is
```

issued. For more information on this field, refer to the
[guide below](#creating-a-staged-proposal-with-validfrom).

### Summary: Final Call

The final call should look like the following, where we:

- Specify our asset as **USDT** on **Asset Hub**.
- Specify the **amount** of **USDT** (100).
- Specify the beneficiary address.
- If applicable, use the `validFrom` field to specify a block number upon which the payout becomes
  valid.

The next steps are to:

- Copy the preimage (and its length)
- Sign and submit the preimage

Once this is finished, one may submit a proposal
[as stated above](#submit-a-treasury-track-referendum). Keep in mind one will also need to
[provide the decision deposit as well](#place-a-decision-deposit-for-the-treasury-track-referendum).

## Creating a Staged Proposal with `validFrom`

Staged proposals are similar to a tranche or milestone-based funding model; instead of all spends
being paid simultaneously, each portion is redeemable at a certain block height. This is done by
specifying each milestone, set at its respective amount and block height at which it becomes

> redeemable.

Reviewer: Should the block number be Relay Chain or Asset Hub block? @muharem

Reviewer 2: Seems to be fetching from the Relay Chain https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/blob/665e3654ceca5a34e8ada66a9805fa7b76fc9ebb/substrate/frame/treasury/src/lib.rs#L737

Reviewer: Yeah but it will be evaluated at the time of calling `payout`

Reviewer 2: I double checked with the example doc instructions as well https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rq10o43E1jc-m6tEh2zvVDxjijsT775II81oYr2oyws/edit The `validFrom` field will be a future relay chain block and the payout can be initiated after that block number is surpassed.

For example, take the following "staged" proposal, which has three milestones, each at 100 DOT, and
is redeemable at the following block heights. Usually, block heights correspond to a date in the
future:

- 100 DOT paid out at block height 1000
- 200 DOT paid out at block height 2000
- 500 DOT paid out at block height 4000

Governance can also propose to **void** a staged proposal before it has completed all of its
payouts.

:::info Calculating dates from block heights

Although not the most accurate form of measurement, block heights can be used to correspond to
certain dates in the future.

:::

### Using `batchAll` for Multi-Spend Proposals

Using the Utility pallet, one can batch multiple `treasury.spend` calls together. Each of these

> calls can have their own `validFrom` block heights, which allows for scenarios such as the above to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calls can have its own `validFrom` block height, which allows for scenarios such as the above to
```

calls can have its own `validFrom` block height, which allows for scenarios such as the above to be
possible.

### Using `validFrom` for a Milestone-Based Proposal

Once each spend is defined within the batched call, the `validFrom` field can be utilized to specify
the "date", or block height, at which each spend will be executed.

### Manually Claiming Payouts

:::info Spends can expire!

Keep in mind that once the `validFrom` block height has been reached, you will have to claim the
spend within 30 days.

:::

In order to claim the spend, you must manually call the `treasury.payout` extrinsic via a `Signed`
origin. The ID used is the one found in
[Polkadot-JS UI > Treasury](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/preimages), where the ID of the proposal
in question would be available:

### Proposing a "Void" for a Staged Proposal

If a proposal that hasn't completed all of its spends needs to be voided, the `treasury.voidSpend`
extrinsic can be utilized via a governance proposal.

## Submit Treasury Proposal via Polkassembly

To submit a treasury track referendum via [Polkassembly](https://polkadot.polkassembly.io/opengov)
click on the FAB button in the bottom right corner. Then,

> - Click on "Create Treasury Proposal" and choose an address for the proposer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click on "Create Treasury Proposal" and choose an address for the proposer.
```
